Original-Mark/index.md, before:

# An earlier form of the Gospel according to Mark?


The gospel according to Mark is titled "The beginning of the Good News of Jesus Christ, the Son of God" (Mark 1:1).
Whether this title was written first or added last, it is clear from the gospel's content and the several matching pronouncements that the author knew what the title would be. 
The climax of the gospel is in Mark 15:33-39 where darkness covers the land, Jesus cries out and dies, the temple curtain is torn in two, and a Roman centurion proclaims "Surely this man was the Son of God". 
Perhaps surprisingly, this is also the last explicit pronouncement that Jesus is either the Christ or the Son of God. 
This essay will investigate the proposition that this was in fact the original ending of Mark. 
The approach for this investigation will be to look at various pericopes while asking the question "did the author know about the tomb when composing this part of the account?"

## A (nearly) complete change of cast.
Mark 15:39-43 introduces several new characters who are critical to the rest of the gospel - many female disciples from Galilee, and Joseph of Arimathea. 
Although the women must have had previous interactions with Jesus, and Joseph - being a prominent member of the Council and supposedly someone who respected Jesus - would be expected to, 
none of them are even hinted at until this point. 
This would be consistent with the earlier part of Mark being written without an awareness of this last scene. 
Pilate and the centurion also have parts in this scene but only in an administrative capacity. 
There is however, one essential character who may have already been introduced - the young man at the tomb in Mark 16:5. 
If this is meant to be the same young man who fled naked in Gethsemane (Mark 14:51) then he could have been introduced earlier in preparation for his role at the empty tomb. 

## Timeline considerations.
Jesus is crucified on the Day of Preparation before the Sabbath, however this information is not disclosed until after his death and the story needs to justify a quick burial. 
On the other hand, Jesus dies at around 3PM which allows time for the burial arrangements and this information does precede the proposed original ending. 


## Predictions of death and resurrection.
Jesus predicts his death and resurrection several times. 
While the audience doubtless knew that Jesus was crucified and appeared afterwards, does it make sense for Mark to include the predictions and then only retell the crucifixion?
On the other hand, would an audience accept an empty tomb but no resurrestion appearances as a satisfactory fulfilment? 
Lets look closer at these predictions.


Mark 8:27-33
And Jesus went on with his disciples to the villages of Caesarea Philippi. 
And on the way he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that I am?” 
And they told him, “John the Baptist; and others say, Elijah; and others, one of the prophets.” 
And he asked them, “But who do you say that I am?” 
Peter answered him, “You are the Christ.” 
And he strictly charged them to tell no one about him.
And he began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes and be killed, and after three days rise again. 
And he said this plainly. And Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. 
But turning and seeing his disciples, he rebuked Peter and said, 
“Get behind me, Satan! For you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but on the things of man.”


Mark 9:2-13
And after six days Jesus took with him Peter and James and John, and led them up a high mountain by themselves. 
And he was transfigured before them, and his clothes became radiant, intensely white, as no one on earth could bleach them. 
And there appeared to them Elijah with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus. 
And Peter said to Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good that we are here. Let us make three tents, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah.” 
For he did not know what to say, for they were terrified. 
And a cloud overshadowed them, and a voice came out of the cloud, “This is my beloved Son; listen to him.” 
And suddenly, looking around, they no longer saw anyone with them but Jesus only.
And as they were coming down the mountain, he charged them to tell no one what they had seen, until the Son of Man had risen from the dead. 
So they kept the matter to themselves, questioning what this rising from the dead might mean. 
And they asked him, “Why do the scribes say that first Elijah must come?” 
And he said to them, “Elijah does come first to restore all things. 
And how is it written of the Son of Man that he should suffer many things and be treated with contempt? 
But I tell you that Elijah has come, and they did to him whatever they pleased, as it is written of him.”


Mark 9:30-32
They left that place and passed through Galilee. Jesus did not want anyone to know where they were, because he was teaching his disciples. 
He said to them, "The Son of Man is going to be delivered into the hands of men. They will kill him, and after three days he will rise." 
But they did not understand what he meant and were afraid to ask him about it.


Mark 10:32-45
And they were on the road, going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was walking ahead of them. 
And they were amazed, and those who followed were afraid. 
And taking the twelve again, he began to tell them what was to happen to him, saying, 
“See, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death and deliver him over to the Gentiles. 
And they will mock him and spit on him, and flog him and kill him. And after three days he will rise.”
And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came up to him and said to him, “Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask of you.” 
And he said to them, “What do you want me to do for you?” 
And they said to him, “Grant us to sit, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your glory.” 
Jesus said to them, “You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, or to be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized?” 
And they said to him, “We are able.” 
And Jesus said to them, 
“The cup that I drink you will drink, and with the baptism with which I am baptized, you will be baptized, 
but to sit at my right hand or at my left is not mine to grant, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared.” 
And when the ten heard it, they began to be indignant at James and John. 
And Jesus called them to him and said to them, 
“You know that those who are considered rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them. 
But it shall not be so among you. But whoever would be great among you must be your servant, 
and whoever would be first among you must be slave of all. 
For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”


Mark 14:17-31
And when it was evening, he came with the twelve. 
And as they were reclining at table and eating, Jesus said, “Truly, I say to you, one of you will betray me, one who is eating with me.” 
They began to be sorrowful and to say to him one after another, “Is it I?” 
He said to them, “It is one of the twelve, one who is dipping bread into the dish with me. 
For the Son of Man goes as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! 
It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.”
And as they were eating, he took bread, and after blessing it broke it and gave it to them, and said, “Take; this is my body.” 
And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks he gave it to them, and they all drank of it. 
And he said to them, “This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many. 
Truly, I say to you, I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.”
And when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. 
And Jesus said to them, 
“You will all fall away, for it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’ 
But after I am raised up, I will go before you to Galilee.” 
Peter said to him, “Even though they all fall away, I will not.” 
And Jesus said to him, “Truly, I tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.” 
But he said emphatically, “If I must die with you, I will not deny you.” And they all said the same.


The prediction after the Last Supper adds the information that the disciples will desert Jesus but also encounter the resurrected Jesus in Galilee. 

The canonical ending of Mark seems consistent with these predictions - it shows Jesus being killed, provides a symbol of resurrection (after 3-ish days), and repeats that the disciples will encounter Jesus in Galilee. 
But does this indicate that when the author wrote the predictions into the script he also knew he was going to fulfil them without appearances? 
Could he have originally assumed that the predictions themselves were satisfactory to imply the resurrection appearances after the gospel's climax?
Certainly the enhanced endings in the later gospels (and the longer endings of Mark) imply that within a few years audiences weren't satisfied with even the inference supplied by the empty tomb.
This is still the case in the modern era, with none less than Bruce Megzter opining that surely this wasn't the intended ending of Mark. **citation needed**


## John's death, burial, and resurrection. 

Perhaps surprisingly, Jesus is not the only prophet to be executed, buried in a tomb, and have resurrection appearances. 

Mark 16:14-29
King Herod heard about this, for Jesus’ name had become well known. 
Some were saying, “John the Baptist has been raised from the dead, and that is why miraculous powers are at work in him.”
Others said, “He is Elijah.”
And still others claimed, “He is a prophet, like one of the prophets of long ago.”
But when Herod heard this, he said, “John, whom I beheaded, has been raised from the dead!”
For Herod himself had given orders to have John arrested, and 
...
he sent an executioner with orders to bring John’s head. The man went, beheaded John in the prison, and brought back his head on a platter. 
...
On hearing of this, John’s disciples came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.


Considering the potential comparisons between John's and Jesus's resurrections it is perhaps surprising that John's story is almost an afterthought. 
In fact the manifestation of the resurrected John the Baptist - that is Jesus's miracles - are presented before the account of John's death. 
At the very least this pericope demonstrates that stories about resurrection did not need to be accompanied by an empty tomb. 


## Hopeless disciples

Jesus not only predicts his own death and resurrection, but also the desertion of his disciples. But implied in the predictions is that this isn't the end for their discipleship. 
Of course, the audience could be expected to be familiar with the disciples continued role in the spreading of the Good News, 
but did the author know how he was going to confirm those inferences when he included the predictions? 
Perhaps the author was anticipating using a resurrection story which included the disciples -  
for example Jesus walking on the water, or even the transfiguration where Jesus is declared the Son of God.
(As suggested by Dominic Crossan)

Commit message:

Why did Mark go viral?

Original-Mark/index.md, after:

# An earlier form of the Gospel according to Mark?


The gospel according to Mark is titled "The beginning of the Good News of Jesus Christ, the Son of God" (Mark 1:1).
Whether this title was written first or added last, it is clear from the gospel's content and the several matching pronouncements that the author knew what the title would be. 
The climax of the gospel is in Mark 15:33-39 where darkness covers the land, Jesus cries out and dies, the temple curtain is torn in two, and a Roman centurion proclaims "Surely this man was the Son of God". 
Perhaps surprisingly, this is also the last explicit pronouncement that Jesus is either the Christ or the Son of God. 
This essay will investigate the proposition that this was in fact the original ending of Mark. 
The approach for this investigation will be to look at various pericopes while asking the question "did the author know about the tomb when composing this part of the account?"

## Aside: Why did Mark go viral?

Matthew and Luke don't so much use Mark as a source as simply rewriting it with the addition of sayings and birth accounts.
And by the time John is written there is an assumption that the audience is aware of the synoptic gospels. 
Although it is easy to imagine a plethora of stories about Jesus, it seems that shortly after Mark was available it became so popular (even canonical) 
that the authors of Matthew and Luke barely have any narrative content which isn't more-or-less copied, 
and the author of John - while knowing some other stories - must have had it committed to memory.

What was it about Mark that led to its dominance of this gospel narrative? 
Was it that it addressed an obstacle to faith which previous stories and even writings did not? 
Two suggestions are offered: 
1. With the first generation of christians dead, there was no-one with the confidence to proclaim "I saw the risen Jesus"
    or even "I knew one of the disciples - you could tell he was sincere about the resurrection."
    Seeing how essential the empty tomb is to later gospels and apologetics, it seems reasonable that this account 
    could have given christian communities that their faith wasn't just ghost stories.
2. In 64 when Nero was blaming christians for the fire in Rome and then persecuting them (perhaps even executing Peter and Paul), 
    the community must have been thinking that surely God's judgement of Rome and Jesus's return as ruler must be imminent. 
    When instead Rome crushes the Judean revolt, decimates Jerusalem and destroys the temple it must have felt like the script had been torn up.
    With Mark able to present the Passion week as largely a story of Jesus against the temple 
    this could have assured the community that actually things were on track - one opponent defeated, 
    the other will surely follow in due course. 
    Maybe they also saw hope that Jews would join christianity as God had explicitly condemned the alternative.  



## A (nearly) complete change of cast.
Mark 15:39-43 introduces several new characters who are critical to the rest of the gospel - many female disciples from Galilee, and Joseph of Arimathea. 
Although the women must have had previous interactions with Jesus, and Joseph - being a prominent member of the Council and supposedly someone who respected Jesus - would be expected to, 
none of them are even hinted at until this point. 
This would be consistent with the earlier part of Mark being written without an awareness of this last scene. 
Pilate and the centurion also have parts in this scene but only in an administrative capacity. 
There is however, one essential character who may have already been introduced - the young man at the tomb in Mark 16:5. 
If this is meant to be the same young man who fled naked in Gethsemane (Mark 14:51) then he could have been introduced earlier in preparation for his role at the empty tomb. 

## Timeline considerations.
Jesus is crucified on the Day of Preparation before the Sabbath, however this information is not disclosed until after his death and the story needs to justify a quick burial. 
On the other hand, Jesus dies at around 3PM which allows time for the burial arrangements and this information does precede the proposed original ending. 


## Predictions of death and resurrection.
Jesus predicts his death and resurrection several times. 
While the audience doubtless knew that Jesus was crucified and appeared afterwards, does it make sense for Mark to include the predictions and then only retell the crucifixion?
On the other hand, would an audience accept an empty tomb but no resurrestion appearances as a satisfactory fulfilment? 
Lets look closer at these predictions.


Mark 8:27-33
And Jesus went on with his disciples to the villages of Caesarea Philippi. 
And on the way he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that I am?” 
And they told him, “John the Baptist; and others say, Elijah; and others, one of the prophets.” 
And he asked them, “But who do you say that I am?” 
Peter answered him, “You are the Christ.” 
And he strictly charged them to tell no one about him.
And he began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes and be killed, and after three days rise again. 
And he said this plainly. And Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. 
But turning and seeing his disciples, he rebuked Peter and said, 
“Get behind me, Satan! For you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but on the things of man.”


Mark 9:2-13
And after six days Jesus took with him Peter and James and John, and led them up a high mountain by themselves. 
And he was transfigured before them, and his clothes became radiant, intensely white, as no one on earth could bleach them. 
And there appeared to them Elijah with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus. 
And Peter said to Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good that we are here. Let us make three tents, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah.” 
For he did not know what to say, for they were terrified. 
And a cloud overshadowed them, and a voice came out of the cloud, “This is my beloved Son; listen to him.” 
And suddenly, looking around, they no longer saw anyone with them but Jesus only.
And as they were coming down the mountain, he charged them to tell no one what they had seen, until the Son of Man had risen from the dead. 
So they kept the matter to themselves, questioning what this rising from the dead might mean. 
And they asked him, “Why do the scribes say that first Elijah must come?” 
And he said to them, “Elijah does come first to restore all things. 
And how is it written of the Son of Man that he should suffer many things and be treated with contempt? 
But I tell you that Elijah has come, and they did to him whatever they pleased, as it is written of him.”


Mark 9:30-32
They left that place and passed through Galilee. Jesus did not want anyone to know where they were, because he was teaching his disciples. 
He said to them, "The Son of Man is going to be delivered into the hands of men. They will kill him, and after three days he will rise." 
But they did not understand what he meant and were afraid to ask him about it.


Mark 10:32-45
And they were on the road, going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was walking ahead of them. 
And they were amazed, and those who followed were afraid. 
And taking the twelve again, he began to tell them what was to happen to him, saying, 
“See, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death and deliver him over to the Gentiles. 
And they will mock him and spit on him, and flog him and kill him. And after three days he will rise.”
And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came up to him and said to him, “Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask of you.” 
And he said to them, “What do you want me to do for you?” 
And they said to him, “Grant us to sit, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your glory.” 
Jesus said to them, “You do not know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, or to be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized?” 
And they said to him, “We are able.” 
And Jesus said to them, 
“The cup that I drink you will drink, and with the baptism with which I am baptized, you will be baptized, 
but to sit at my right hand or at my left is not mine to grant, but it is for those for whom it has been prepared.” 
And when the ten heard it, they began to be indignant at James and John. 
And Jesus called them to him and said to them, 
“You know that those who are considered rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them. 
But it shall not be so among you. But whoever would be great among you must be your servant, 
and whoever would be first among you must be slave of all. 
For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”


Mark 14:17-31
And when it was evening, he came with the twelve. 
And as they were reclining at table and eating, Jesus said, “Truly, I say to you, one of you will betray me, one who is eating with me.” 
They began to be sorrowful and to say to him one after another, “Is it I?” 
He said to them, “It is one of the twelve, one who is dipping bread into the dish with me. 
For the Son of Man goes as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! 
It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.”
And as they were eating, he took bread, and after blessing it broke it and gave it to them, and said, “Take; this is my body.” 
And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks he gave it to them, and they all drank of it. 
And he said to them, “This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many. 
Truly, I say to you, I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.”
And when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. 
And Jesus said to them, 
“You will all fall away, for it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’ 
But after I am raised up, I will go before you to Galilee.” 
Peter said to him, “Even though they all fall away, I will not.” 
And Jesus said to him, “Truly, I tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.” 
But he said emphatically, “If I must die with you, I will not deny you.” And they all said the same.


The prediction after the Last Supper adds the information that the disciples will desert Jesus but also encounter the resurrected Jesus in Galilee. 

The canonical ending of Mark seems consistent with these predictions - it shows Jesus being killed, provides a symbol of resurrection (after 3-ish days), and repeats that the disciples will encounter Jesus in Galilee. 
But does this indicate that when the author wrote the predictions into the script he also knew he was going to fulfil them without appearances? 
Could he have originally assumed that the predictions themselves were satisfactory to imply the resurrection appearances after the gospel's climax?
Certainly the enhanced endings in the later gospels (and the longer endings of Mark) imply that within a few years audiences weren't satisfied with even the inference supplied by the empty tomb.
This is still the case in the modern era, with none less than Bruce Megzter opining that surely this wasn't the intended ending of Mark. **citation needed**


## John's death, burial, and resurrection. 

Perhaps surprisingly, Jesus is not the only prophet to be executed, buried in a tomb, and have resurrection appearances. 

Mark 16:14-29
King Herod heard about this, for Jesus’ name had become well known. 
Some were saying, “John the Baptist has been raised from the dead, and that is why miraculous powers are at work in him.”
Others said, “He is Elijah.”
And still others claimed, “He is a prophet, like one of the prophets of long ago.”
But when Herod heard this, he said, “John, whom I beheaded, has been raised from the dead!”
For Herod himself had given orders to have John arrested, and 
...
he sent an executioner with orders to bring John’s head. The man went, beheaded John in the prison, and brought back his head on a platter. 
...
On hearing of this, John’s disciples came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.


Considering the potential comparisons between John's and Jesus's resurrections it is perhaps surprising that John's story is almost an afterthought. 
In fact the manifestation of the resurrected John the Baptist - that is Jesus's miracles - are presented before the account of John's death. 
At the very least this pericope demonstrates that stories about resurrection did not need to be accompanied by an empty tomb. 


## Hopeless disciples

Jesus not only predicts his own death and resurrection, but also the desertion of his disciples. But implied in the predictions is that this isn't the end for their discipleship. 
Of course, the audience could be expected to be familiar with the disciples continued role in the spreading of the Good News, 
but did the author know how he was going to confirm those inferences when he included the predictions? 
Perhaps the author was anticipating using a resurrection story which included the disciples -  
for example Jesus walking on the water, or even the transfiguration where Jesus is declared the Son of God.
(As suggested by Dominic Crossan)
